---
layout: default
class: Project
title: -generate srcs ';output=' DIR ( ';' ( system | generate | classpath))* ...
summary: Generate sources 
since: 5.1
---

Virtually all the work bnd is concerned about happens in generating the JAR file. The key idea is to _pull_ resources in the JAR, instead of the more traditional _push_ model of other builders. This works well, except for _generating source code_. This generating step must happen before the compiler is called, and the compiler is generally called before bnd becomes active. 

This `-generate` instruction specifies the code generating steps that must be executed. Source code can be generated by _system_ commands or the bnd _external plugins_.
 
	-generate	::= 	clause ( ',' clause )*
	clause		::= 	FILESET ';' 'output=' DIR (';' option )*
	src		::=	FILESET
	option		::= 	'system=' STRING
			|   'generate=' STRING
            |   'classpath=' PATH
            |   'workingdir=' FILE

For each clause, the key of the clause is used to establish an Ant File Set, e.g. `foo/**.in`. This a glob expression with the exception that the double wildcard ('**') indicates to any depth of directories. The `output` attribute _must_ specify a directory. If the output must be compiled this directory must be on the bnd source path.

If any file in the source is older than any file in the target (to any depth), or the target is empty, the clause is considered _stale_. If the clause is not stale, it is further ignored. If no further options are set on the clause, a warning is generated that some files are out of date. 

If either a warning or error option is given, these will be executed on the project.

If a command `STRING` is given it is executed as in the `${system}` macro. If the command `STRING` starts with a 
minus sign (`-`) then a failure is not an error, it is reported as warning.

The generate option will execute an _external plugin_ or plain JAR with a `Main-Class` manifest header. The choice is made by looking at the first word in the `generate` attribute.

If this _name_ has a dot in it, like in a fully qualified class name, it is assume that species a _class name_. (If the name starts with a dot, it will be assume to be a name in the default package.) In this case, the `classpath` attribute of the instruction can be used to provide additional JARs on the command's classpath. The format of PATH is the standard format for instructions like -buildpath. Inn this case, you can also set the `workingdir` to a directory. This directory is specified relative to the project.

Without a dot in the name, the name is assumes to be an _external plugin_ name, with the `objectClass` (service type) of `Generator<? extends Options>`. External , or Main-Class jars, can come from an external repository or a local workspace project.

The `generate` value is a _command line_. It can use the standard _unix_ like way of specifying a command. It supports flags (boolean parameters) and parameter that take a value. When this external plugin is executed, it is expected to create files fall within the _target_, if not, an error is reported. These changed or created files are refreshed in Eclipse.

The command line can be broken in different commands with the semicolon (`';'`), like a unix shell. Redirection of stdin (`'<'`), stdout (`'>'`, or `'1>'`), and stderr (`'1>'`) are supported.  The path for redirection is relative to the project directory, even if `workingdir` has been specified. 

## Plugin Example

Include in the bnd build is a _javagen_ external plugin that is useful to generate Java code based on build information. It uses a template directory with Java files. When the external plugin runs, it will use all these files to write matching Java files in the output directory, in a matching package directory. The input Java files can be prefixed with a properties header:

    ---
    foo: 1
    ---
    package foobar;
    class Foo {
        int foo = ${foo};
    }

The optional header is removed and then the remainder of the file is ran through the bnd macro processor.

If this example is used, it is necessary to add a new _source folder_. In Eclipse, this requires adding an entry in the `.classpath` file, in bnd it requires the modification of the `src` property.  

    src=${^src},src-gen

Assuming that the input files are in the `gen` directory, the following can be used to automatically generate the output files based on the input files.
 
    -generate:   \
        gen/**.java; \ 
            output='src-gen/' ; \ 
            generate='javagen -o src-gen gen/'

## Main Class Example

JFlex and CUP are popular tools to create _lexers_ and _parsers_. The JARs are on Maven Central with  Main-Class manifest attribute. The JFlex JAR, however, requires the `cup_runtime` JAR on the classpath.

We can directly use these executable JARs with the `-generate` instruction.

    -generate: \
        lex/Foo.lex; \
            output      = gen-src/ \
            generate    = `jflex.Main -d lex-gen/ lex/Foo.lex'; \
            classpath   = 'de.jflex:cup_runtime;version=11b-20160615'

Notice that we use the `maven` GAV format here to find the `cup_runtime` because these JARs are unfortunately not bundles.




